Add post on cranelift backend (#720)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/inside-rust/2020-11-02-Using-rustc_cranelift_codegen.md

---
layout: post
title: "Using rustc_codegen_cranelift for debug builds"
author: Joshua Nelson
team: The Compiler Team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
---

## What is `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

[`rustc_codegen_cranelift`], or just `cg_clif` for short, is a new experimental
codegen backend for the Rust compiler. The existing backend is LLVM, which very
good at producing fast, highly optimized code, but is not very good at
compiling code quickly. `cg_clif`, which uses the [Cranelift] project, would
provide a fast backend which greatly improves compile times, at the cost of

> very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only performing very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is
```

`rustc_cranelift_codegen` [into the main Rust git repository][#77975].
`cg_clif` still is not distributed with `rustup`, but this means you can now
build it from source in-tree!

## How do I use `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

In this section, I'll walk through step-by-step how to build the new backend from source, then use it on your own projects. All code is copy/paste-able, and each step is explained.

First, let's build `cg_clif` from source.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/bjorn3/rustc_codegen_cranelift.git
$ ./prepare.sh
$ cargo build --release
$ ./build_sysroot/build_sysroot.sh
```

Now, we can start using it for our own projects. For demonstration
purposes, I'll be be using `cargo`, but you can use any Rust project supported
by `cg_clif`.

```
$ cd ..
$ git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/
$ cd cargo
$ ../cargo.sh build
...
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 49.93s
```

It works! For comparison, let's see how long the equivalent LLVM backend would
take.

```sh
$ rustup install nightly-2020-10-31
$ cargo +nightly-2020-10-31 build
...
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 54.64s
```

> LLVM takes a full 5 seconds longer for a full build.

Reviewer 2: How much is the difference in incremental recompilation time? cg_clif doesn't support internal parallelism until parallel rustc lands. This means that cg_llvm can normally utilize the cpu cores more effectively when there are few crates that can be built at a given time. In incremental mode, it likely only needs to recompile a single cgu, so there won't be any internal parallelism for cg_llvm too.

Author: Does `cg_llvm` support internal parallelism? Is that parallism in LLVM itself?

Author: cg_clif was actually slower, not faster :/

Reviewer 2: cg_llvm optimizes codegen units in parallel.

Author: Still slower if I only change main.rs:
```
$ CARGO_TARGET_DIR=cg_clif ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/cargo.sh build
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.89s
$ cargo +nightly-2020-10-31 build
   Compiling cargo v0.50.0 (/home/joshua/cargo)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.89s
```
Maybe it's because I compiled cg_clif locally but the nightly version comes from CI and does LTO?

Reviewer 2: serde_derive shows up a lot in the profile. I think it is simply due to the fact that serde_derive is not very optimized in this case.

Author: Probably https://github.com/serde-rs/json/issues/727 then.

Reviewer 2: That issue is about compiletime of crates using serde_json due to large amounts of ir being generated. This issue is serde_derive being slow. It takes ~14% of the compilation time for libcargo.

Reviewer 2: For cg_llvm it is <3% of the compilation time spent in serde_derive for libcargo.

author: Joshua Nelson
team: The Compiler Team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
---

## What is `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

[`rustc_codegen_cranelift`], or just `cg_clif` for short, is a new experimental
codegen backend for the Rust compiler. The existing backend is LLVM, which very
good at producing fast, highly optimized code, but is not very good at
compiling code quickly. `cg_clif`, which uses the [Cranelift] project, would
provide a fast backend which greatly improves compile times, at the cost of
very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is
that `cg_clif` will eventually be the default backend in debug mode.

## What is the progress of using `rustc_codegen_cranelift` for debug builds?

There has been an [Major Change Proposal][MCP] open for some time for making
`cg_clif` part of the main Rust repository. Recently, [the MCP was
accepted][compiler-team#270] and the compiler team [merged][#77975]
`rustc_cranelift_codegen` [into the main Rust git repository][#77975].
`cg_clif` still is not distributed with `rustup`, but this means you can now
build it from source in-tree!

> ## How do I use `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

Reviewer 2: Should this also mention how to build it from the main repo? That is a lot quicker.

Author: Yeah, that's what I meant by 'I feel silly'. I'll move building in-tree to a separate section and use the `prepare.sh` for the rest of the article.

Author: @bjorn3 is there a way to build cg_clif without also running the tests?

Author: actually, test.sh didn't work either:
```
[BUILD] sysroot
error: could not execute process `/home/joshua/rustc_codegen_cranelift/build_sysroot/../target/debug/cg_clif_build_sysroot -vV` (never executed)

Caused by:
  No such file or directory (os error 2)

real	0m0.043s
user	0m0.036s
sys	0m0.010s
```

Reviewer 2: Not at the moment. I can add something.

Author: >  test.sh didn't work either:

I think this is because I have `CARGO_TARGET_DIR` set; I unset it in the parent but I guess running a bash shell set it again.

Reviewer 2: I will unset it in `build_sysroot.sh`.

Author: Unsetting `CARGO_TARGET_DIR` didn't help. I think there's some cache invalidation issue, maybe?

Reviewer 2: bjorn3/rustc_codegen_cranelift@324e63de289e249481445a399fcbcad62b7ab71d unsets `CARGO_TARGET_DIR` where necessary.

Reviewer 2: Just saw your previous comment. Did you build in debug mode? (not passing `--release` to `test.sh`)

Author: Well, either way it works with `build --release && build_sysroot.sh` directly, so probably no need to worry about it.

In this section, I'll walk through step-by-step how to build the new backend from source, then use it on your own projects. All code is copy/paste-able, and each step is explained.

First, download the Rust repository.

```console
git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/rust
```

> There are a few bugs with bootstrapping that were only recently fixed and haven't yet been merged, so we need to use the changes from [#78624].

Reviewer 2: This post should probably be blocked on merging that PR.

Reviewer 2: It just got merged.

compiling code quickly. `cg_clif`, which uses the [Cranelift] project, would
provide a fast backend which greatly improves compile times, at the cost of
performing very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is
that `cg_clif` will eventually be the default backend in debug mode.

## What is the progress of using `rustc_codegen_cranelift` for debug builds?

There has been a [Major Change Proposal][MCP] open for some time for making
`cg_clif` part of the main Rust repository. Recently, [the MCP was
accepted][compiler-team#270] and the compiler team [merged][#77975]
`rustc_cranelift_codegen` [into the main Rust git repository][#77975].
`cg_clif` is not yet distributed with `rustup`, but this means you can now
build it from source in-tree!

## How do I use `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

In this section, I'll walk through step-by-step how to build the new backend from source, then use it on your own projects. All code is copy/paste-able, and each step is explained.

First, let's build `cg_clif` from source.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/bjorn3/rustc_codegen_cranelift.git
$ ./prepare.sh

> $ cargo build --release
> $ ./build_sysroot/build_sysroot.sh

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ ./build.sh
```

```

Now, we can start using it to compile a project. For demonstration purposes,
I'll be be using `cargo`, but you can use any Rust project supported by
`cg_clif`.

```
$ cd ..
$ git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/
$ cd cargo

> $ ../cargo.sh build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/build/cargo.sh build
```

...
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 49.93s
```

It works! For comparison, let's see how long the equivalent LLVM backend would
take.

```sh
$ rustup install nightly-2020-10-31
$ cargo +nightly-2020-10-31 build
...
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 54.64s
```

LLVM takes a full 5 seconds longer for a full build. Next, let's try incremental builds:

```
$ git apply <<EOF
diff --git a/src/cargo/lib.rs b/src/cargo/lib.rs
index bccb41121..703afa754 100644
--- a/src/cargo/lib.rs
+++ b/src/cargo/lib.rs
@@ -36,8 +36,8 @@ use anyhow::Error;
 use log::debug;
 use std::fmt;
 
-pub use crate::util::errors::{InternalError, VerboseError};
 pub use crate::util::{CargoResult, CliError, CliResult, Config};
+pub use crate::util::errors::{InternalError, VerboseError};
 
 pub const CARGO_ENV: &str = "CARGO";
EOF

> $ ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/build.sh

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/build/build.sh
```

---
layout: post
title: "Using rustc_codegen_cranelift for debug builds"
author: Joshua Nelson
team: The Compiler Team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
---

## What is `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

[`rustc_codegen_cranelift`], or just `cg_clif` for short, is a new experimental

> codegen backend for the Rust compiler. The existing backend is LLVM, which very

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
codegen backend for the Rust compiler. The existing backend is LLVM, which is very
```

Author: Oops :laughing:

good at producing fast, highly optimized code, but is not very good at
compiling code quickly. `cg_clif`, which uses the [Cranelift] project, would
provide a fast backend which greatly improves compile times, at the cost of

> only performing very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is

Reviewer 3: I suggest either removing the "only" or changing "very" to "a":

```suggestion
performing very few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is
```

```suggestion
only performing a few optimizations. This is a great fit for debug builds, and the hope is
```

that `cg_clif` will eventually be the default backend in debug mode.

## What is the progress of using `rustc_codegen_cranelift` for debug builds?

> There has been an [Major Change Proposal][MCP] open for some time for making

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There has been a [Major Change Proposal][MCP] open for some time for making
```

Author: Hmm, I say 'an em-c-p', which has a vowel at the start. Do you pronounce it differently?

Reviewer 3: I pronounce it the same. What you wrote renders as:

> There has been an [Major Change Proposal]().

Author: oh oops :laughing:

`cg_clif` part of the main Rust repository. Recently, [the MCP was
accepted][compiler-team#270] and the compiler team [merged][#77975]
`rustc_cranelift_codegen` [into the main Rust git repository][#77975].

> `cg_clif` still is not distributed with `rustup`, but this means you can now

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`cg_clif` is not yet distributed with `rustup`, but this means you can now
```

build it from source in-tree!

## How do I use `rustc_codegen_cranelift`?

In this section, I'll walk through step-by-step how to build the new backend from source, then use it on your own projects. All code is copy/paste-able, and each step is explained.

First, let's build `cg_clif` from source.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/bjorn3/rustc_codegen_cranelift.git
$ ./prepare.sh
$ cargo build --release
$ ./build_sysroot/build_sysroot.sh
```

> Now, we can start using it for our own projects. For demonstration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, we can start using it in a project. For demonstration
```

Author: 'in a project' sounds like it's a dependency. Maybe 'to compile a project'?

Reviewer 3: Sure, something like that sounds fine. The "our own" part is what sounds funny, because it implies that you can use it for some projects beforehand, but not personal projects.

```

It works! For comparison, let's see how long the equivalent LLVM backend would
take.

```sh
$ rustup install nightly-2020-10-31
$ cargo +nightly-2020-10-31 build
...
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 54.64s
```

LLVM takes a full 5 seconds longer for a full build. Next, let's try incremental builds:

```
$ git apply <<EOF
diff --git a/src/cargo/lib.rs b/src/cargo/lib.rs
index bccb41121..703afa754 100644
--- a/src/cargo/lib.rs
+++ b/src/cargo/lib.rs
@@ -36,8 +36,8 @@ use anyhow::Error;
 use log::debug;
 use std::fmt;
 
-pub use crate::util::errors::{InternalError, VerboseError};
 pub use crate::util::{CargoResult, CliError, CliResult, Config};
+pub use crate::util::errors::{InternalError, VerboseError};
 
 pub const CARGO_ENV: &str = "CARGO";
EOF
$ ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/build.sh
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 7.98s
$ cargo +nightly-2020-10-31 build
   Compiling cargo v0.50.0 (/home/joshua/cargo)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 5.48s
```

LLVM is actually *faster* here: `cg_clif` doesn't support internal parallelism
until parallel rustc lands. This means that `cg_llvm` can normally utilize the

> cpu cores more effectively when there are few crates that can be built at a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CPU cores more effectively when there are few crates that can be built at a
```

> given time.

Reviewer 2: In this case it turned out to be serde_derive being slower at runtime when compiled using cg_clif than cg_llvm.

Author: Updated it with the info about serde_derive.

## Building in-tree

This section is mostly for compiler hackers, but feel free to follow along even
if you're just interested! The reason this isn't the recommended way to build

> `cg_clif` is because the rust compiler takes a very long time to build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`cg_clif` is because the Rust compiler takes a very long time to build.
```

 
 pub const CARGO_ENV: &str = "CARGO";
EOF

> $ ../rustc_codegen_cranelift/build/build.sh

Author: This is inconsistent with `build.sh` above, which isn't in the `build/` subdirectory. Which did you mean? @bjorn3

Reviewer 2: Ah, this should be `build/cargo.sh build`.
